Chapter 58 Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob, their sins. Yet they
seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a nation that did righteousness, and forsook
not the ordinance of their God. They ask of me the ordinances of justice, they take delight
in approaching to God. Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not? Wherefore have
we afflicted our soul, and thou takest no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your fast,
ye find pleasure, and exact all your labours. Behold, ye fast for strife and debate, and
to smite with the fist of wickedness. Ye shall not fast as ye do this day, to make your voice
to be heard on high. Is it such a fast that I have chosen, a day for a man to afflict
his soul? Is it to bow down his head as a bulrush, and to spread sackcloth and ashes
under him? Wilt thou call this a fast and an acceptable day to the Lord? Is not this
the fast that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens,
and to let the oppressed go free, and that ye break every yoke? Is it not to deal thy
bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house, when thou seest
an acre that thou cover him, and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh? Then shall thy
light break forth as the morning, and thine health shall spring forth speedily, and thy righteousness
shall go before thee. The glory of the Lord shall be thy rear reward. Then shall thou call and the
Lord shall answer. Thou shall cry, and he shall say, Here I am. If thou take away from the midst
of thee the yoke, the putting forth of the finger, and speaking vanity, and if thou draw out thy soul
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted soul, then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy
darkness be as the noonday, and the Lord shall guide thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in
drought, and make fat thy bones, and thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a spring of water
whose waters fail not, and they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places.
Thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations, and thou shalt be called the
repairer of the breach, the restorer of paths to dwelling. If thou turn away thy foot from the
Sabbath, from doing thy pleasure on my holy day, and call the Sabbath the delight, the holy of the
Lord, honorable, and shalt honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own pleasure,
nor speaking thine own words, then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord, and I will cause
thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father,
for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it. Chapter 59 Behold, the Lord's hand is not
shortened, that it cannot save, neither his ear heavy, that it cannot hear. But your iniquities
have separated between you and your God, and your sins have hid his face from you,
that he will not hear. For your hands are defiled with blood, and your fingers with iniquity.
Your lips have spoken lies, your tongue hath muttered perverseness. None calleth for justice,
nor any pleadeth for truth. They trust in vanity, and speak lies. They conceive mischief,
and bring forth iniquity. They hatch cockatrice eggs, and weave the spider's web. He that eateth
their eggs dieth, and that which is crushed breaketh out into a viper. Their webs shall
not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their works. Their works are
works of iniquity, and the act of violence is in their hands. Their feet run to evil,
and they make haste to shed innocent blood. Their thoughts are thoughts of iniquity.
Wasting and destruction are in their paths. The way of peace they know not, and there is no
judgment in their goings. They have made them crooked paths. Whosoever goeth therein shall not
know peace. Therefore is judgment far from us. Neither doth justice overtake us. We wait for
light, but behold obscurity, for brightness, but we walk in darkness. We grope for the wall
like the blind, and we grope as if we had no eyes. We stumble at noonday as in the night.
We are in desolate places as dead men. We roar all like bears, and mourn sore like doves.
We look for judgment, but there is none, for salvation, but it is far off from us.
For our transgressions are multiplied before thee, and our sins testify against us. For our
transgressions are with us, and as for our iniquities we know them, in transgressing and
lying against the Lord, and departing away from our God. Speaking oppression and revolt,
conceiving and uttering from the heart words of falsehood. And judgment is turned away backward,
and justice standeth afar off. For truth is fallen in the street, and equity cannot enter.
Yea, truth faileth, and he that departeth from evil maketh himself a prey. And the Lord saw it,
and it displeased him that there was no judgment. And he saw that there was no man, and wondered
that there was no intercessor. Therefore his arm brought salvation unto him, and his righteousness
it sustained him. For he put on righteousness as a breastplate, and a helmet of salvation upon his
head. And he put on the garments of vengeance for clothing, and was clad with zeal as a cloak.
According to their deeds, accordingly he will repay. Fury to his adversaries, recompense to
his enemies. To the islands he will repay recompense. So shall they fear the name of the
Lord from the west, and his glory from the rising of the sun. When the enemy shall come in like a
flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him. And the Redeemer shall
come to Zion, and unto them that turn from transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord.
As for me, this is my covenant with them, saith the Lord. My Spirit that is upon thee,
and my words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.
Chapter 60 Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee.
For behold, the darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, but the Lord shall
arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall come to thy light,
and kings to the brightness of thy rising. Lift up thine eyes round about and see,
all they gather themselves together, they come to thee. Thy sons shall come from far, and thy
daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shalt see and flow together, and thine heart shall
fear and be enlarged. Because the abundance of the sea shall be converted unto thee,
the forces of the Gentiles shall come unto thee. The multitude of camels shall cover thee,
the dromedaries of Midian and Ephar, all they from Sheba shall come. They shall bring gold and
incense, and they shall show forth the praises of the Lord. All the flocks of Kedar shall be gathered
together unto thee, the rams of Nebeoth shall minister unto thee. They shall come up with
acceptance on mine altar, and I will glorify the house of my glory. Who are these that fly as a
cloud, and as the doves to their windows? Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the ships of
Tarshish first, to bring thy sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of
the Lord thy God, and to the Holy One of Israel, because he hath glorified thee. And the sons of
strangers shall build up thy walls, and their kings shall minister unto thee. For in my wrath
I smote thee, but in my favor have I had mercy on thee. Therefore thy gates shall be open
continually. They shall not be shut day nor night, that men may bring unto thee the forces of the
Gentiles, and that their kings may be brought. For the nation and kingdom that will not serve
thee shall perish, yea, those nations shall be utterly wasted. The glory of Lebanon shall
come unto thee, the fir tree, the pine tree, and the box together, to beautify the place of my
sanctuary, and I will make the place of my feet glorious. The sons also of them that afflicted
thee shall come bending unto thee, and all they that despised thee shall bow themselves down at
the soles of thy feet, and they shall call thee the city of the Lord, the Zion of the Holy One of
Israel. Whereas thou hast been forsaken and hated, so that no man went through thee, I will make thee
an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Thou shalt also suck the milk of the Gentiles,
and shalt suck the breast of kings, and thou shalt know that I the Lord, and thy Savior,
and thy Redeemer, the mighty one of Jacob. For brass I will bring gold, and for iron
I will bring silver, and for wood brass, and for stones iron. I will also make thy officers
peace, and thine exactors righteousness. Violence shall no more be heard in thy land,
wasting nor destruction within thy borders, but thou shalt call thy walls salvation,
and thy gates praise. The sun shall be no more thy light by day, neither for brightness
shall the moon give light unto thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light,
and thy God thy glory. Thy sun shall no more go down, neither shall thy moon withdraw itself,
for the Lord shall be thy everlasting light, and the days of thy morning shall be ended.
Thy people also shall be all righteous, they shall inherit the land forever, the branch of
my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one shall become a thousand,
and a small one a strong nation. I the Lord will hasten it in his time.
you